Add How to write unit tests blog posts (#7083)
sourcegraph/about: content/blogposts/2024/gp-how-to-write-unit-tests.md

---
title: "How to write unit tests"
authors:
  - name: Ekemini Samuel
  - name: Ado Kukic
    url: https://x.com/adocomplete
publishDate: 2024-07-15T10:00-07:00
description: "Discover the essentials of unit testing: key components, best practices, and the advantages of using frameworks and tools like Cody for efficient testing."
tags: [blog, guest-post]
slug: "how-to-write-unit-tests"
published: true
heroImage: https://storage.googleapis.com/sourcegraph-assets/blog/gp-how-to-write-unit-tests/image_og.jpg
socialImage: https://storage.googleapis.com/sourcegraph-assets/blog/gp-how-to-write-unit-tests/image_og.jpg
---

> Imagine being in the final stages of a critical project. Everything seems on track, but a bug surfaces, throwing the entire schedule into disorder. According to a study by the [IBM System Science Institute](https://www.researchgate.net/figure/IBM-System-Science-Institute-Relative-Cost-of-Fixing-Defects_fig1_255965523), the cost to fix a bug found after product release can be up to 6 times higher than if caught during the design phase. This scenario is all too common in software development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Imagine being in the final stages of a critical project. Everything seems on track, but a bug surfaces, throwing the entire schedule into chaos. According to a study by the [IBM System Science Institute](https://www.researchgate.net/figure/IBM-System-Science-Institute-Relative-Cost-of-Fixing-Defects_fig1_255965523), the cost to fix a bug found after product release can be up to 6 times higher than if caught during the design phase. This scenario is all too common in software development.
```

Catching bugs late in the development process is frustrating and costly. As renowned software developer [Martin Fowler](https://www.martinfowler.com/) once said, "*Any fool can write code that a computer can understand. Good programmers write code that humans can understand.*" Unit testing ensures that code is functional, maintainable, and reliable.

> This guide on unit testing will explain why writing unit tests matters, discuss the different unit-test frameworks available, how unit-testing practices have evolved, and provide some pro tips for writing maintainable unit tests. It will also show how Cody can enhance the whole process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide on unit testing will explain why writing unit tests matters, discuss the different unit-test frameworks available, how unit-testing practices have evolved, and provide some pro tips for writing maintainable unit tests. It will also show how [Cody](https://sourcegraph.com/cody) can enhance the whole process.
```

- **JUnit (Java):** [JUnit](https://www.javatpoint.com/junit-tutorial) is widely used to write repeatable tests for units of code in Java.
- **Jest (JavaScript):** [Jest](https://jestjs.io/) is a popular testing framework for JavaScript, known for its simplicity and powerful features.
- **PyTest (Python):** [Pytest](https://pytest.org/) is a versatile framework for writing simple and scalable test cases in Python.
- **Testing (Golang):** The standard [Go testing](https://pkg.go.dev/testing) framework is designed to integrate seamlessly with Golang's ecosystem.

These frameworks offer features like test discovery, setup and teardown mechanisms, and rich assertion libraries, making it easier to implement and maintain tests for a wide range of software. Next, let's break down the key components of a unit test.

## Deconstructing a unit test

A typical unit test has three key components, each testing the application's functional behavior.

1. **Arrange:** This is the phase where you set up the initial state for the test. A good unit test focuses on a single state change, so the **arrange** step prepares the necessary input and the environment for the test.

> 2. **Act:** The **Act** component executes the state change or computation. The actual operation or method being tested is executed with the predefined inputs from the **Arrange** phase. For example, the `FindClosestBanks` function can be triggered with the input, as shown in the code snippet below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Act:** The **Act** component executes the state change or computation. The actual operation or method being tested is executed with the predefined inputs from the **Arrange** phase. For example, the `FindClosestBanks` function below can be triggered with the input, as shown in the code snippet below.
```

3. **Assert:** Assert verifies that the code behaves as expected and checks if the output matches the expected behavior. If the code behaves as anticipated, your test passes; if not, it's back to the drawing board.

Let's look at an example of a **unit test in Golang** using the [testing package](https://pkg.go.dev/testing), illustrating the three components of a unit test:

```go
    func TestFindClosestBanks(t *testing.T) {
        // Arrange
        banks := []Bank{
            {Name: "Bank A", X: 1, Y: 1},

>             {Name: "Bank B", X: 2, Y: 2},

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            {Name: "Bank B", X: 2, Y: 2},
            {Name: "Bank C", X: 5, Y: 7},
```

        }
    }
```

Once Cody is installed and set up in your development environment, you can leverage its capabilities to generate unit tests for this Go program.

**Writing unit tests with Cody**
Let’s generate unit tests for the **Go search program** described above in the code snippet by following these steps:

1. **Generate unit tests**: Open your Go program in your code editor where Cody is installed. Use Cody's **COMMANDS** in the editor, as shown below, to **Generate Unit Tests** for the `searchWords` function.

![Generating unit tests](https://storage.googleapis.com/sourcegraph-assets/blog/gp-how-to-write-unit-tests/image_004.png)

Cody analyzes the function and automatically generates comprehensive unit test cases, ensuring thorough coverage of various input scenarios. The next step is to review the generated test for modification.

1. **Review generated tests**: Cody provides a set of unit tests you can review and modify if necessary. These tests help ensure the `searchWords` function behaves as expected under different conditions.

![Go program](https://storage.googleapis.com/sourcegraph-assets/blog/gp-how-to-write-unit-tests/image_005.png)

> 1. **Static code analysis**: After the modification, Cody also performs static code analysis to detect any syntax errors, code style violations, and other potential issues without executing the code. This helps maintain code quality and consistency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Code analysis**: After the modification, Cody can perform code analysis to detect any syntax errors, code style violations, and other potential issues without executing the code. This helps maintain code quality and consistency.
```
